docs: Effective Gno (#1000)
gnolang/gno: docs/how-to-guides/effective-gno.md

---
id: 'effective-gno'
---

# Effective Gno

Welcome to the guide for writing effective Gno code. This document is designed
to help you understand the nuances of Gno and how to use it effectively.

Before we dive in, it's important to note that Gno shares several similarities
with Go. Therefore, if you haven't already, we highly recommend reading
["Effective Go"](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go) as a primer.

## Counter-Intuitive Good Practices

This section highlights some Gno good practices that might seem
counter-intuitive, especially if you're coming from a Go background.

### Embrace Global Variables in Gno

> In Gno, using global variables isn't just acceptable - it's encouraged. This is

Reviewer: Maybe we should add the caveat here that this _persistence_ is limited to realms and not all Gno code (ie, packages)

Author: ec37c80e

---
id: 'effective-gno'
---

# Effective Gno

Welcome to the guide for writing effective Gno code. This document is designed
to help you understand the nuances of Gno and how to use it effectively.

Before we dive in, it's important to note that Gno shares several similarities
with Go. Therefore, if you haven't already, we highly recommend reading
["Effective Go"](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go) as a primer.

## Counter-Intuitive Good Practices

This section highlights some Gno good practices that might seem
counter-intuitive, especially if you're coming from a Go background.

### Embrace Global Variables in Gno

> In Gno, using global variables isn't just acceptable - it's encouraged. This is

Reviewer 2: Perhaps qualify that using global variables is preferred _only_ because of realm persistence -- just to guard against someone misunderstanding and making all their variables global.

Author: ec37c80e

because global variables in Gno provide a way to have persisted states
automatically.

In Go, you would typically write your logic and maintain some state in memory.
However, to persist the state and ensure it survives a restart, you would need
to use a store (like a plain file, custom file structure, a database, a
key-value store, an API, etc.).

In contrast, Gno simplifies this process. When you declare global variables in
Gno, the GnoVM automatically persists and restores them as needed between each
run.

> However, be mindful not to export your global variables. Doing so would make

Reviewer: > However, be mindful not to export your global variables. Doing so would make..

I understand this is a simplified example, but to me this message + the corresponding code block implies that were `counter` public that one would be able to increment it even without a setter function like `IncCounter()`. And if there is a public setter function like `IncCounter` present which, as it is currently implemented, would be accessible for all to read/write provided there is no modifier present. 

Am I understanding this incorrectly?

> However, be mindful not to export your global variables. Doing so would make

Reviewer 2: Is this still true? I think this code path it ends up following if something like that happens. https://github.com/gnolang/gno/blob/master/gnovm/pkg/gnolang/realm.go#L148

Author: You're likely correct.

I believe we should examine this more thoroughly, ensuring we assess not just the variable, but also aspects like whether it's a pointer.

them accessible for everyone to read and write.

Here's an ideal pattern to follow:

```go
var counter int

func GetCounter() int {
    return counter
}

func IncCounter() {
    counter++
}
```

### Embrace Panic in Gno

In Gno, it's important to know when to return an `error` and when to use `panic()`.
Each does something different to your code and data.

> When you return an error in Gno, it's like giving back any other piece of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you return an `error` in Gno, it's like giving back any other piece of data.
```

It tells you something went wrong, but it doesn't stop your code or undo any
changes you made.

> But, when you use panic in Gno, it stops your code right away, says it failed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, when you use `panic` in Gno, it stops your code right away, says it failed,
```

> and doesn't save any changes you made. This is safer when you want to stop

Reviewer: Consider adding the keyword `revert` for those coming from other chain-specific languages who are familiar with similar behavior

Author: I suggest the following:
1. Create a specific discussion topic for considering the addition of the keyword.
2. Find a suitable location in the documentation to discuss this, perhaps "from-solidity-to-gno.md" instead of effective-gno.

Author: I believe you're referring to the keyword, not for the gno language, but rather the keyword in the context of the document, such as for "SEO" or searchability purposes. 

Certainly, can you suggest an alternative?

Reviewer: Ah yes, not so much a reserved keyword but more as SEO keyword. As I understand it, our version of `revert` (Solidity) is essentially, `panic`.

Reviewer: Good point, perhaps better for Solidity-specific reference than general Effective Gno. Will resolve.

everything and not save wrong changes.

In general, it's good to use `panic()` in realms. In reusable packages, you can

> use either panic or errors, depending on what you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use either `panic` or `error`, depending on what you need.
```

```go
import "std"

func Foobar() {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    if caller != "g1234567890123456789012345678912345678" {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    // ...
}
```

- TODO: suggest MustXXX and AssertXXX flows in p/.

### Understand the importance of `init()`

In Gno, the `init()` function isn't just a function, it's a cornerstone. It's

> automatically triggered when a new realm is added onchain, making it a one-time

Reviewer: Consider adding the keyword `constructor` for those coming from other chain-specific languages who are familiar with similar behavior

Author: 0768dce7f79758decdaded2b97a1b79ebd113407

setup tool for the lifetime of a realm.

Unlike Go, where `init()` is used for tasks like setting up database
connections, configuring logging, or initializing global variables every time
you start a program, in Gno, `init()` is executed once per realm's lifetime.

In Gno, `init()` primarily serves two purposes:

> 1. It registers your new realm on a new realm. This is typically done using the

Reviewer: > It registers your new realm on a new realm.

This is confusing wordage. I am not sure what you are trying to say though perhaps there is a way to restate this- like creating an instance of another realm within this realm in order to call its corresponding methods?

Author: c63a170c

and properly configured from the get-go.

## Gno Good Practices

### Design Your Realm as a Public API

In Go, all your packages, including your dependencies, are typically treated as
part of your safe zone, similar to a secure perimeter. The boundary is drawn
between your program and the rest of the world, which means you secure the API
itself, potentially with authentication middlewares.

However, in Gno, your package is the public API. It's exposed to the outside
world and can be accessed by other realms. Therefore, it's crucial to design
your realm with the same level of care and security considerations as you would
a public API.

One approach is to simulate a secure perimeter within your realm by having
private functions for the logic and then writing your API layer by adding some
front-facing API with authentication. This way, you can control access to your
realm's functionality and ensure that only authorized callers can execute
certain operations.

```go
import "std"

func PublicMethod(nb int) {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    privateMethod(caller, nb)
}

func privateMethod(caller std.Address, nb int) { /* ... */ }
```

> In this example, `PublicMethod` is a public function that can be called by other

Reviewer: This is an awesome example, but the explanatory code block which _could_ showcase a modifier like `assertIsAdmin()` is missing (or hidden) within the function above `func privateMethod(caller std.Address, nb int) { /* ... */ }`. 

Perhaps we could expand the internal function's logic to showcase how the `caller` argument is checked against a custom modifier function that provides the necessary access control.

I think providing something here would make this example much more impactful, otherwise we are _assuming_ that developers will know what to do with `caller`; if they do nothing to check against `caller`, then calling `privateMethod` inside of `PublicMethod` will do little to prevent abuse given the missing access control logic.

Author: The pattern I proposed is actually implemented in some instances, for example, in foo20: https://github.com/gnolang/gno/blob/master/examples/gno.land/r/demo/foo20/foo20.gno#L50.

Your suggestion is valid, but I plan to address that aspect later. The primary intention behind this effective Gno advice is to maintain the internal API's privacy by simply making it unexported. This approach centers on a limited number of public functions. These functions could serve as straightforward proxies or incorporate additional logic. This might include adding a caller, a block number, or as you mentioned, conducting ACL checks.

I prefer to retain the example as it is for now. However, I agree that expanding the comments to include more examples could be beneficial if you think it would aid in understanding.

realms. It retrieves the caller's address using `std.GetOrigCaller()`, and then
passes it to `privateMethod`, which is a private function that performs the
actual logic. This way, `privateMethod` can only be called from within the
realm, and it can use the caller's address for authentication or authorization
checks.

### Construct "Safe" Objects

A safe object in Gno is an object that is designed to be tamper-proof and
secure. It's created with the intent of preventing unauthorized access and
modifications. This follows the same principle of making a package an API, but
for a Go object that can be directly referenced by other realms.

The goal is to create an object which, once instantiated, can be linked and its
pointer can be "stored" by other realms without issue, because it protects its
usage completely.

```go
type MySafeStruct {
    counter nb
    admin std.Address
}

func NewSafeStruct() *MySafeStruct {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    return &MySafeStruct{
        counter: 0,
        admin: caller,
    }
}

func (s *MySafeStruct) Counter() int { return s.counter }
func (s *MySafeStruct) Inc() {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()

>     if caller != s.admin {

Reviewer: Something like this could be used in the above example for access control, or consider combining sections to avoid redundancy

Author: A secure struct always involves access control. Therefore, we should address access control in that section.

Additionally, we should have a separate access control section, specifically discussing access control at the contract level rather than the object level.

I will create a new section on contract-level access control.

Author: e5d95a2c

---
id: 'effective-gno'
---

# Effective Gno

Welcome to the guide for writing effective Gno code. This document is designed
to help you understand the nuances of Gno and how to use it effectively.

Before we dive in, it's important to note that Gno shares several similarities
with Go. Therefore, if you haven't already, we highly recommend reading
["Effective Go"](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go) as a primer.

## Disclaimer

Gno is a young language. The practices we've identified are based on its current
state. As Gno evolves, new practices will emerge and some current ones may
become obsolete. We welcome your contributions and feedback. Stay updated and
help shape Gno's future!

## Counter-intuitive good practices

This section highlights some Gno good practices that might seem
counter-intuitive, especially if you're coming from a Go background.

### Embrace global variables in realms

> In Gno, using global variables is not only acceptable, but it's also encouraged,

Reviewer 3: Typo here, should be `global variables are...`, and `they're also...`

Author: Could someone please double-check? I believe the original source is accurate.

Reviewer 3: @thehowl you're completely right, I missed the `using` completely 🤦‍♂️

Go developers "Don't panic.", in Gno, we actually embrace `panic`.

Panic in Gno is not just for critical errors or programming mistakes as it is in
Go. Instead, it's used as a control flow mechanism to stop the execution of a
contract when something goes wrong. This could be due to an invalid input, a
failed precondition, or any other situation where it's not possible or desirable
to continue executing the contract.

So, while in Go, you should avoid `panic` and handle `error`s gracefully, in Gno,
don't be afraid to use `panic` to enforce contract rules and protect the integrity
of your contract's state. Remember, a well-placed panic can save your contract
from a lot of trouble.

When you return an `error` in Gno, it's like giving back any other piece of data.
It tells you something went wrong, but it doesn't stop your code or undo any
changes you made.

But, when you use `panic` in Gno, it stops your code right away, says it failed,
and doesn't save any changes you made. This is safer when you want to stop
everything and not save wrong changes.

In general, it's good to use `panic()` in realms. In reusable packages, you can

> use either `panic` or `error`, depending on what you need.

Author: I agree, and that's why I've added a note at the end of this section to write examples of AssertXXX and MustXXX.

Also, we might think about another counter-intuitive good practice in Gno that's not so obvious. In Gno, missing an `errcheck` can be a bigger problem than in Go. So, it might be a good idea to have assert as the default and use a special prefix when there's an error to return.
Right now, we probably won't agree on this, so we can't add it to this Effective Gno doc just yet.
I plan to try this out in my own libraries.

Anyway, let’s rephrase this section as you suggested before merging.

> use either `panic` or `error`, depending on what you need.

Author: Fixed 8002296b

```go
import "std"

func Foobar() {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    if caller != "g1xxxxx" {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    // ...
}
```

> - TODO: suggest MustXXX and AssertXXX flows in p/.

Author: The inline to-dos can be fixed now or later. Although some people may dislike them, I personally find them beneficial when merged in this way.

Regarding write permissions, I believe you have the highest level of permissions, possibly because it's my personal fork. However, you still have the following options:

1. Open a pull request against my pull request.
2. Utilize GitHub's "suggestion" feature, which can be committed with a single click. This is my preferred method for receiving suggestions, and it also allows your authorship to be respected.

makes sense for users to check out what they are executing too. Code simplicity,
explicitness, and trustability are paramount.

Another good reason for creating simple, focused libraries is the composability
of Go and Gno. Essentially, you can think of each `p/` package as a Lego brick
in an ever-growing collection, giving more power to users. `p/` in Gno is
basically a way to extend the standard libraries in a community-driven manner.

Unlike other compiled languages where dependencies are not always well-known and
clear metrics are lacking, Gno allows for a reputation system not only for the
called contracts, but also for the dependencies.

For example, you might choose to use well-crafted `p/` packages that have been
reviewed, audited, and have billions of transactions under their belt, boasting
super high stability. This approach can make your code smaller and more
reliable.

In other platforms, an audit usually involves auditing everything, including the
dependencies. However, in Gno, we can expect that over time, contracts will
become smaller, more powerful, and partially audited by default, thanks to this
enforced open-source system.

> 

Reviewer 4: I think a passage on how we address supply chain attacks is important here. These are much harder to do in Gno, where packages are immutable.

```suggestion

One key difference between the Go and Gno ecosystem is the trust assumption when
adding a new dependency. Dependency code always needs to be vetted, [regardless
of what programming language or ecosystem you're using][sc-attack]. However, in
Gno, you can have the certainty that the author of a package cannot overwrite an
existing, published contract; as that is simply disallowed by the blockchain. In
other words, using existing and widely-used packages reinforces your security
rather than harming it.
[sc-attack]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_chain_attack

```

Pike. In Go, documentation is for users, but users are often developers. In Gno,
documentation is for users, but users can be another developer or the end users.

In Go, we usually have well-written documentation for other developers to
maintain and use our code as a library. Then, we often have another layer of
documentation on our API, sometimes with OpenAPI Specs, Protobuf, or even user
documentation.

In Gno, the focus shifts towards writing documentation for the end user. You can
even consider that the main reader is an end user, who is not so interested in
technical details, but mostly interested in how and why they should use a
particular endpoint. Comments will be used for code source reading, but also to
generate documentation and even for smart wallets that need to understand what
to do.

Inline comments have the same goal: to guide users (developers or end users)
through the code. While comments are still important for maintainability, their
main purpose in Gno is for discoverability. This shift towards user-centric
documentation reflects the broader shift in Gno towards making code more
accessible and understandable for all users, not just developers.

> TODO: `func ExampleXXX`.

Reviewer 3: Leftover?

Author: I'm happy to merge with this TODO. Please feel free to propose an implementation now.

Reviewer 3: Should be fine for now, there is a list at the bottom of the doc to resolve dangling TODOs

> TODO: `func ExampleXXX`.

Reviewer 4: Resolving in favour of conversation w/ milos

The absence of reflection in Gno is not just about simplicity, but also about
safety. Reflection can be powerful, but it can also lead to code that is hard to
understand, hard to debug, and prone to runtime errors. By not supporting
reflection, Gno encourages you to write code that is explicit, clear, and easy
to understand.

We're currently in the process of considering whether to add reflection support
or not, or perhaps in a privileged mode for very rare libraries. But for now,
when you're writing Gno code, remember: explicit is better than implicit, and
clear code is better than clever code.

## Gno good practices

### Package naming and organization

Your package name should match the folder name. This helps to prevent having
named imports, which can make your code more difficult to understand and
maintain. By matching the package name with the folder name, you can ensure that
your imports are clear and intuitive.

Ideally, package names should be short and human-readable. This makes it easier
for other developers to understand what your package does at a glance. Avoid
using abbreviations or acronyms unless they are widely understood.

> Packages and realms can be organized into subfolders. However, consider that the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Packages and realms can be organized into subdirectories. However, consider that the
```

UNIX > Windows :)

best place for your main project will likely be `r/NAMESPACE/DAPP`, similar
to how repositories are organized on GitHub.

If you have multiple sublevels of realms, remember that they are actually
independent realms and won't share data. A good usage could be to have an
ecosystem of realms, where one realm is about storing the state, another one
about configuration, etc. But in general, a single realm makes sense.

You can also create small realms to create your ecosystem. For example, you
could centralize all the authentication for all your company/organization in
`r/NAMESPACE/auth`, and then import it from all your contracts.

The `p/` prefix is different. In general, you should use top-level `p/` like
`p/NAMESPACE/DAPP` only for things you expect people to use. If your goal is
just to have internal libraries that you created to centralize your helpers and
don't expect that other people will use your helpers, then you should probably

> use subfolders like `p/NAMESPACE/DAPP/foo/bar/baz`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
use subdirectories like `p/NAMESPACE/DAPP/foo/bar/baz`.
```

### Define types and interfaces in pure packages (p/)

In Gno, it's common to create `p/NAMESPACE/DAPP` for defining types and
interfaces, and `r/NAMESPACE/DAPP` for the runtime, especially when the goal is
for the realm to become a standard that could be imported by `p/`.

The reason for this is that `p/` can only import `p/`, while `r/` can import
anything. This separation allows you to define standards in `p/` that can be
used across multiple realms and packages.

> In general, you can just write your `r/` to be an app. But if for some reason
> you introduce a concept that should become a standard, it makes sense to have a
> dedicated `p/` so that people can start not only composing your realm from other
> realms but also for `p/`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In general, you can just write your `r/` to be an app. But if for some reason
you introduce a concept that can be reused, it makes sense to have a
dedicated `p/` so that people can re-use your logic without depending on
your realm's data.
```

For instance, if you want to create a token type in a realm, you can use it, and
other realms can import the realm and compose it. But if you want to create a
`p/` helper that will create a pattern, then you need to have your interface and
types defined in `p/` so anything can import it.

By separating your types and interfaces into `p/` and your runtime into `r/`,
you can create more modular, reusable, and standardized code in Gno. This
approach allows you to leverage the composability of Gno to build more powerful
and flexible applications.

### Design your realm as a public API

In Go, all your packages, including your dependencies, are typically treated as
part of your safe zone, similar to a secure perimeter. The boundary is drawn
between your program and the rest of the world, which means you secure the API
itself, potentially with authentication middlewares.

> However, in Gno, your package is the public API. It's exposed to the outside

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, in Gno, your realm is the public API. It's exposed to the outside
```

```

In this example, `PublicMethod` is a public function that can be called by other
realms. It retrieves the caller's address using `std.GetOrigCaller()`, and then
passes it to `privateMethod`, which is a private function that performs the
actual logic. This way, `privateMethod` can only be called from within the
realm, and it can use the caller's address for authentication or authorization
checks.

### Contract-level access control

In Gno, it's a good practice to design your contract as an application with its
own access control. This means that different endpoints of your contract should
be accessible to different types of users, such as the public, admins, or
moderators.

The goal is usually to store the admin address or a list of addresses
(`std.Address`) in a variable, and then create helper functions to update the
owners. These helper functions should check if the caller of a function is
whitelisted or not.

Let's deep dive into the different access control mechanisms we can use:

One approach is to look at the EOA (Externally Owned Account), which is the
original caller. For this, you should call `std.GetOrigCaller()`, which returns

> the address of the wallet used to make the transaction.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the public address of the keypair that signed the transaction.
```

Author: ```suggestion
the public address of the account that signed the transaction.
```

Internally, this call will look at the frame stack, which is basically the stack
of callers including all the functions, anonymous functions, other realms, and
take the initial caller. This allows you to identify the original caller and
implement access control based on their address.

Here's an example:

```go
import "std"

var admin std.Address = "g1xxxxx"

func AdminOnlyFunction() {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()

>     if caller != admin {

Reviewer 4: !!! bad

allows for "gno.land/r/demo/evil" to call "gno.land/r/demo/mycontract".AdminOnlyFunction, and succeed if the origcaller is the admin.

We should recommend PrevRealm().Addr().

Reviewer 4: I can think of very few cases where `GetOrigCaller` actually makes sense to be used. But we're having this discussion partly in #1048. I think we should gliss over GetOrigCaller as we're finalizing details, I think it's currently more sensible to encourage only PrevRealm...

Reviewer 6: also GetOrigCaller auth prevents abstracted accounts, daos and every other "user-like realms" from using functionalities guarded by it

Reviewer 5: When discussing this, we should just see how Ethereum does it. 

You've 2 variables in the execution context of Ethereum:
- msg.sender - the immediate, previous caller:
EOA calls contract A, which calls contract B - In A, msg.sender is EOA, in B, msg.sender is A.

- tx.origin - the real, initial signer of the transaction - in the above case, tx.origin would always be the EOA.

I think while we do differ from Ethereum, we should not reinvent the wheel (too much), so I propose we go with this logic, which I think aligns with most people's views already.

Let's just define this, utilize good naming conventions, be consistent, and add it to the docs.

Reviewer 6: isn't tx.origin here because of backward compatiblity?
I think we should think about this and not do cargo cult mentality actually
can someone explain cases where we do need tx.origin?

Author: I recommend using `PrevRealm` in all of Gno, but let's also keep a part about how to use `GetOrigCaller` properly.

Also, we could have `gno lint` give a warning if someone uses `GetOrigCaller`. This warning could stop if you write a comment like `// nolint: I know what I’m doing.`

Author: Fixed in 16984a26.

        panic("permission denied")
    }
    // ...
}

// func UpdateAdminAddress(newAddr std.Address) { /* ... */ }
```

In this example, `AdminOnlyFunction` is a function that can only be called by
the admin. It retrieves the caller's address using `std.GetOrigCaller()`, and
then checks if the caller is the admin. If not, it panics and stops the
execution.

Another approach is to use `std.PrevRealm().Addr()`, which returns the previous
realm. This can be either another realm contract, or the calling user if there
is no other intermediary realm.

The goal of this approach is to allow a contract to own assets (like grc20 or

> native tokens), so that you can create contracts that can be called by another

Author: Sounds good to me.

Perhaps we can add a "Terms" section to provide explanations and list variations, ensuring consistency throughout.

WDYT? Could you help improve consistency, please?

contract, reducing the risk of stealing money from the original caller. This is
the behavior of the default grc20 implementation.

Here's an example:

```go
import "std"

func TransferTokens(to std.Address, amount int64) {
    caller := std.PrevRealm().Addr()
    if caller != admin {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    // ...
}
```

In this example, `TransferTokens` is a function that can only be called by the
admin. It retrieves the caller's address using `std.PrevRealm().Addr()`, and
then checks if the caller is the admin. If not, it panics and stops the
execution.

By using these access control mechanisms, you can ensure that your contract's
functionality is accessible only to the intended users, providing a secure and
reliable way to manage access to your contract.

### Using avl.Tree for efficient data retrieval

In Gno, the `avl.Tree` data structure is a powerful tool for optimizing data
retrieval. It works by lazily resolving information, which means it only loads
the data you need when you need it. This allows you to scale your application
and pay less gas for data retrieval.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

[AVL is short for Adelson-Velsky and Landis:][avl-wiki] under the hood, it is an
implementation of a self-balancing binary tree.
[avl-wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AVL_tree

```

The `avl.Tree` can be used like a map, where you can store key-value pairs and
retrieve an entry with a simple key. However, unlike a traditional map, the
`avl.Tree` doesn't load unnecessary data. This makes it particularly efficient
for large data sets where you only need to access a small subset of the data at
a time.

Here's an example of how you can use `avl.Tree`:

```go
import "avl"

var tree avl.Tree

func GetPost(id string) *Post {
    return tree.Get(id).(*Post)
}

func AddPost(id string, post *Post) {
    tree.Set(id, post)
}
```

In this example, `GetPost` is a function that retrieves a post from the
`avl.Tree` using an ID. It only loads the post with the specified ID, without
loading any other posts.

In the future, we plan to add internal "map" support that will be as efficient
as an `avl.Tree` but with a more idiomatic API. For now, consider storing things
in slices when you know the structure will stay small, and consider using

> `avl.Tree` each time you can make direct access.

Reviewer 4: what does this last sentence mean?

Author: It's a bad way to say: 'when you need to use a string index' :)

Author: Fixed a1d980ff

You can also create SQL-like indexes by having multiple `avl.Tree` instances for
different fields. For example, you can have an `avl.Tree` for ID to *post, then
an `avl.Tree` for Tags, etc. Then, you can create reader methods that will just
retrieve what you need, similar to SQL indexes.

By using `avl.Tree` and other efficient data structures, you can optimize your
Gno code for performance and cost-effectiveness, making your applications more
scalable and efficient.

> TODO: multi-indices example

Reviewer 3: Leftover?

Reviewer 3: Resolved as part of https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/1000#discussion_r1434195360

### Construct "safe" objects

A safe object in Gno is an object that is designed to be tamper-proof and
secure. It's created with the intent of preventing unauthorized access and
modifications. This follows the same principle of making a package an API, but

> for a Go object that can be directly referenced by other realms.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
for a Gno object that can be directly referenced by other realms.
```
Typo?

The goal is to create an object which, once instantiated, can be linked and its
pointer can be "stored" by other realms without issue, because it protects its
usage completely.

```go
type MySafeStruct {
    counter nb
    admin std.Address
}

func NewSafeStruct() *MySafeStruct {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    return &MySafeStruct{
        counter: 0,
        admin: caller,
    }
}

func (s *MySafeStruct) Counter() int { return s.counter }
func (s *MySafeStruct) Inc() {
    caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
    if caller != s.admin {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    s.counter++
}
```

Then, you can register this object in another or several other realms so other
realms can access the object, but still following your own rules.

```go 
import "gno.land/r/otherrealm"

func init() {
    mySafeObj := NewSafeStruct()
    otherrealm.Register(mySafeObject)
}

> // then, otherrealm can call the public functions but won't be the "owner" of

Reviewer 3: Typo here, should be `other realm`

Author: ```suggestion
// then, other realm can call the public functions but won't be the "owner" of
```

// the object.
```

### Choosing between native tokens and GRC20 tokens

In Gno, you've got two main choices for tokens: Native or GRC20. Each has its
own pros and cons, and the best fit depends on your needs.

#### Native tokens

Native tokens are managed by the banker module, separate from Gnovm. They're
simple, strict, and secure. You can create, transfer, and check balances with an
RPC call, no Gnovm needed.

For example, if you're creating a coin for cross-chain transfers, native tokens
are your best bet. They're IBC-ready and their strict rules offer top-notch
security.

> TODO: native banker example.

Reviewer 3: Leftover?

Reviewer 3: Resolved as part of https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/1000#discussion_r1434195360

#### GRC20 tokens

GRC20 tokens, on the other hand, are like Ethereum's ERC20 or CosmWasm's CW20.
They're flexible, composable, and perfect for DeFi protocols and DAOs. They
offer more features like token-gating, vaults, and wrapping.

For instance, if you're creating a voting system for a DAO, GRC20 tokens are
ideal. They're programmable, can be embedded in safe Go objects, and offer more
control.

Remember, GRC20 tokens are more gas-intensive and aren't IBC-ready yet. They

> also come with shared ownership, meaning the contract retains some control.

Author: Only an account can make a native coin transfer.

On a contract, the situation is different. A GRC20 is essentially a `map[addr]balance`. Although the standard specifies that only the caller account can make a GRC20 transfer, in practice, the contract may have flaws or intentionally create an invalid/custom GRC20 implementation.

The initial GRC20 implementation permits an admin (typically the contract) to mint/burn/transfer. However, we anticipate that good GRC20 implementations will not include abusive "admin features" or have bugs.

In the end, your choice depends on your needs: simplicity and security with

> Native tokens, or flexibility and control with GRC20 tokens. And if you want the

Author: Hum, I’ve a doubt, because we’re using  `std.Coin` internally…

Probably coin should be the consistent wording, and token should be referenced in a “terms” section or doc.

best of both worlds, you can wrap a native token into a GRC20 compatible
token.

```go
import "gno.land/p/demo/grc/grc20"

var fooToken grc20.AdminToken = grc20.NewAdminToken("Foo Token", "FOO", 4)

func MyBalance() uint64 {
	caller := std.GetOrigCaller()
	balance, _ := fooToken.BalanceOf(caller)
	return balance
}
```

See also: https://gno.land/r/demo/foo20

#### Wrapping native tokens

Want the best of both worlds? Consider wrapping your Native tokens. This gives
your tokens the flexibility of GRC20 while keeping the security of Native
tokens. It's a bit more complex, but it's a powerful option that offers great
versatility.

See also: https://github.com/gnolang/gno/tree/master/examples/gno.land/r/demo/wugnot

> ## TODO
> 
> - packages and realms versionning
> - code generation
> - unit tests, fuzzing tests, example tests, txtar
> - shipping non-contract stuff with the realm: client, documentation, assets
> - unoptimized / gas inefficient code
> - optimized data structures
> - using state machines (gaming example)
> - TDD and local dev
> - contract-contract pattern
> - upgrade pattern
> - pausable pattern
> - flexible DAO pattern
> - maketx run to use go as shell script
> - when to launch a local testnet, a full node, gnodev, or using testnets,
>   staging, etc
> - go std vs gno std
> - use rand
> - use time
> - use oracles
> - subscription model
> - forking contracts
> - finished packages
> - packages for developeres, realms for users (NPM vs App Store)
> - cross-realm ownership: function pointer, callback, inline function ownership
> - advanced usages of the frame stack

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO:

- packages and realms versionning
- code generation
- unit tests, fuzzing tests, example tests, txtar
- shipping non-contract stuff with the realm: client, documentation, assets
- unoptimized / gas inefficient code
- optimized data structures
- using state machines (gaming example)
- TDD and local dev
- contract-contract pattern
- upgrade pattern
- pausable pattern
- flexible DAO pattern
- maketx run to use go as shell script
- when to launch a local testnet, a full node, gnodev, or using testnets,
  staging, etc
- go std vs gno std
- use rand
- use time
- use oracles
- subscription model
- forking contracts
- finished packages
- packages for developeres, realms for users (NPM vs App Store)
- cross-realm ownership: function pointer, callback, inline function ownership
- advanced usages of the frame stack
-->
```

`std.GetOrigCaller()`, which returns the public address of the account that
signed the transaction.

TODO: explain when to use `std.GetOrigCaller`.

Internally, this call will look at the frame stack, which is basically the stack
of callers including all the functions, anonymous functions, other realms, and
take the initial caller. This allows you to identify the original caller and
implement access control based on their address.

Here's an example:

```go
import "std"

var admin std.Address = "g1xxxxx"

func AdminOnlyFunction() {
    caller := std.PrevRealm().Addr()
    if caller != admin {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    // ...
}

// func UpdateAdminAddress(newAddr std.Address) { /* ... */ }
```

In this example, `AdminOnlyFunction` is a function that can only be called by
the admin. It retrieves the caller's address using `std.PrevRealm().Addr()`,
this can be either another realm contract, or the calling user if there is no
other intermediary realm. and then checks if the caller is the admin. If not, it
panics and stops the execution.

The goal of this approach is to allow a contract to own assets (like grc20 or

> native tokens), so that you can create contracts that can be called by another

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
native coins), so that you can create contracts that can be called by another
```

Same as other comments regarding coin/token.

Author: Let's see later (#1623)

modifications. This follows the same principle of making a package an API, but
for a Gno object that can be directly referenced by other realms.

The goal is to create an object which, once instantiated, can be linked and its
pointer can be "stored" by other realms without issue, because it protects its
usage completely.

```go
type MySafeStruct {
    counter nb
    admin std.Address
}

func NewSafeStruct() *MySafeStruct {
    caller := std.PrevRealm().Addr()
    return &MySafeStruct{
        counter: 0,
        admin: caller,
    }
}

func (s *MySafeStruct) Counter() int { return s.counter }
func (s *MySafeStruct) Inc() {
    caller := std.PrevRealm().Addr()
    if caller != s.admin {
        panic("permission denied")
    }
    s.counter++
}
```

Then, you can register this object in another or several other realms so other
realms can access the object, but still following your own rules.

```go 
import "gno.land/r/otherrealm"

func init() {
    mySafeObj := NewSafeStruct()
    otherrealm.Register(mySafeObject)
}

// then, other realm can call the public functions but won't be the "owner" of
// the object.
```

> ### Choosing between native tokens and GRC20 tokens

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Choosing between native coins and GRC20 tokens
```

Author: Let's see later (#1623)

> In Gno, you've got two main choices for tokens: Native or GRC20. Each has its
> own pros and cons, and the best fit depends on your needs.
> 
> #### Native tokens
> 
> Native tokens are managed by the banker module, separate from GnoVM. They're

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Gno, you've got two main choices: Native or GRC20. Each has its
own pros and cons, and the best fit depends on your needs.

#### Native coins

Native coins are managed by the banker module, separate from GnoVM. They're
```

Author: Let's see later (#1623)

simple, strict, and secure. You can create, transfer, and check balances with an

> RPC call, no Gnovm needed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
RPC call, no GnoVM needed.
```

> For example, if you're creating a coin for cross-chain transfers, native tokens

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, if you're creating a coin for cross-chain transfers, native coins
```

Author: Let's see later (#1623)

are your best bet. They're IBC-ready and their strict rules offer top-notch
security.

> TODO: native banker example.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Read about how to use the Banker module [here](https://docs.gno.land/concepts/standard-library/banker).
```

Author: please, you relative links, so it renders well on github, on docs.gno and later, on the gnoweb docs' section.

> TODO: native banker example.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Read about how to use the Banker module [here](../concepts/standard-library/banker).
```
